# -*- mode: perl;-*-
=pod

=head1 NAME

kuvert_submit - MTA wrapper for mail submission to kuvert(1)

=head1 SYNOPSIS 

kuvert_submit [sendmail-options] [recipients...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Kuvert_submit submits an email either directly to L<sendmail(8)> or
enqueues it for L<kuvert(1)> for further processing.  kuvert_submit
should be called by your MUA instead of your usual MTA to enable
kuvert to intercept and process the outgoing mails. Please see your MUA's
documentation about how to override the MTA to be used.

Kuvert_submit transparently invokes C</usr/sbin/sendmail> directly
if it cannot find a ~/.kuvert configuration file, or if the -bv option
is given. Otherwise, it enqueues 
the email in the queue directory specified in the configuration file. 
If that fails or if the configuration file is invalid, kuvert_submit prints an 
error message to STDERR and terminates with exit code 1. 
On successful submission, kuvert_submit terminates with exit code 0.

Kuvert_submit also logs messages to syslog with the facility "mail".

=head1 OPTIONS

If it runs the MTA directly then kuvert_submit passes all options through 
to /usr/sbin/sendmail. Otherwise, it ignores all options except 
-f and -t (and -bv which triggers a direct sendmail pass-through).

=over

=item -f <emailaddress>

Sets the envelope sender. Kuvert_submit passes this on to kuvert.

=item -t

Tells an MTA to use the recipients in the mail instead of any commandline
arguments. If -t is not given then kuvert_submit passes the recipients 
from the commandline on to kuvert.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over

=item ~/.kuvert 

The configuration file read by kuvert and kuvert_submit. If not present,
kuvert_submit calls /usr/sbin/sendmail directly.

=item ~/.kuvert_queue

The default queue directory.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<kuvert(1)>

=head1 AUTHOR

Alexander Zangerl <az@snafu.priv.at>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENCE

copyright 1999-2008 Alexander Zangerl <az@snafu.priv.at>

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2
as published by the Free Software Foundation.







=cut

